# Some experiments with Meijer duality (perpetual WIP)

Here, I want to study through coding experiments the duality between Observer and Enumerator discovered by Erik Meijer [1].

I am following [1, 2] and the implementation is based on a rewriting in Typescript of [this code snippet](https://gist.github.com/ivarru/1138462). Pseudocode in Meijer's talks was also useful to clarify some aspects.

**Warning.** At the moment I am not sure about the underlying theory and I could use math terms in an improper way. I would like to develop the details more formally, but I am now more interested in building something that runs.

## Summary

* **Web architectures as categorical traces.** Since some particular categories with dual objects have a trace, it is possible to build one in a reactive framework based on the duality Observer/Enumerator. I think that trace is a fundamental structure underlying modern UI architectures for the Web such as CycleJS and React+Redux.
* **Transparent reactivity**. Transparent reactivity (proposed and pioneered by [Meteor framework](https://www.meteor.com) [5]) is a sort of "functor". Roughly speaking, it allows us to write  reactive code in a more familiar interactive style without callbacks or streams. In practice Meteor `Tracker.autorun` transforms a function over `Enumerable`s (in Meteor reactive data sources or dependent functions are _a kind of_ enumerable data structure) into a function over `Observable`s that is rerun by the underlying framework every time inputs change, automagically.
* **Composition**. Meijer claims that "reactive" is all about composing side effects. I defined some HOCs for building complex interactions between side effects.

Current limitations:

* Unfortunately, it is not possible to check types at run time since Typescript compiles into Javascript. For this reason, I am using custom type guards (see trace and par API) in order to split union of types. Moreover, union type in Typescript is not a variant type, I still do not know if this could be a source of trouble. So far it is ok, but API could change in the future, if I come up with a better solution.
* Function types are not contra-variant in Typescript. Composition is not always type safe. Perhaps I can fix that with some constraints on generics.
* I am overlooking performance issues. I feel I can optimize the code reducing the number of "forks" I make (i.e. how many times annihilate is called) and the number of shared queues.
* Threads are fake.
* Subscriptions are not disposed properly.
* API are unstable. Take this project as an experiment, it is not a library.

A list of things I would like to explore is [here](WISHLIST.md).

## Examples

In `test` there are some examples of usage. In order to run tests:

```
$ npm install
$ npm run test
```

A simple example of a cyclejs-like app. Full code is in `test/traceTest.ts`.
This code is based on the first example in CycleJS tutorial.

```js
// the main application takes two observables of types Time and HtmlDom.
// Time observable returns a tick signal every 1 ms while dom observable is a representation of the dom
const main = (input: Observable<Init|HtmlDom|Time>): Observable<HtmlDom|void> => {
  const [ clock ] = split<Time, HtmlDom>(input, isTimeEvent);
  const [ subject, output ] = makeSubject<HtmlDom|void>();
  // listen to clock ticks
  clock.subscribe({
    onNext: ({tick}: Time) => {
      // update the dom on each tick
      subject.onNext({tagName: 'h1', value: `${tick} ms elapsed`});
    }
  });
  // return the dom driver stream
  return output;
}

// just an helper function
const id = (x: Observable<Init>) => x;
// Observable<Time> and Observable<HtmlDom> are generated by two "drivers": clock and dom.
const drivers = par(id, par<HtmlDom,void,HtmlDom,Time>(dom, clock, isDomEvent), isInitEvent);
const app = seq(drivers, main);
const run = trace<Init, HtmlDom, void>(app, isVoid);
```

Graphically, it looks like:

```
+------------------------+
| +-----+                |
| |clock+----+           |
| +-----+    |           |
| +-----+    |  +-----+  |
+-|dom  +--- +--+main +--+
  +-----+    |  +-----+
+------------+

```

## Credits

This project is pretty much reinventing the wheel and could not have been started without ideas and code from several sources.

Observable/Enumerable duality was discovered and made popular by Erik Meijer [1]. I followed the categorical construction defined in [2]. My implementation is strongly influenced by Meijer's lively talks and, basically, is a rewriting in Typescript of [this code](https://gist.github.com/ivarru/1138462).

Rummelhoff observed in [2] that the Meijer category is symmetric and monoidal; the latter is not said explicitly, but it should follow from his definition of the tensor product. The fact that symmetric monoidal categories with dual objects have a trace is well-known [3, 4]. I built the trace following the diagrams you can find on Wikipedia.

The new trend of functional/unidirectional architectures (e.g. React+Redux and CycleJS) helped me a lot to connect the dots I was chasing. In particular, CycleJS [implementation](https://github.com/cyclejs/cyclejs/blob/master/base/src/index.ts) guided me for building the trace. I am not deeply into CycleJS as I would like to, but I am strongly influenced and motivated by this framework. There are strong analogies with what I am attempting here.

CycleJS is compositional (André Staltz, CycleJS creator, says "fractal"). Here, I want to explore a slightly different (?) alternative where composition is defined by higher order components (i.e. seq, par, trace). In particular, my source of inspiration is [6] where it is defined a symmetric monoidal structure for parallel asynchronous composition (very similar to what I would like to do here), a trace operator and a duality player/opponent instead of observer/enumerator. Moreover, symmetric monoidal categories are a quite natural structure to model circuits (see, for example, John Baez's blog). I have already attempted to apply [6] to web programming few years ago.

The application of dataflow-like languages to UI design or, more in general, to signal processing is not a new idea at all. Functional Reactive Programming (FRP) should have many examples. I have not seen [Elm](http://elm-lang.org/) yet, but it should share several ideas with FRP, dataflows, CycleJS.
A nice paper on signal processing is also [7]. The language syntax and semantics remember a symmetric monoidal category, but the framework is not reactive nor asynchronous and it is highly specific to a particular domain. [7], as well as other algebraic languages, has a similar set of operators/rules (e.g. seq, par, trace/feedback and others) which are the essence of the monoidal structure defined in [6].

## Disclaimer

This is a personal side project that I am carrying out just for fun and curiosity.

Although the intended audience is mainly myself, I try to be as much accurate as possible.
However, it is often difficult to find time and energies for polishing and reviewing what I do.
I thank you in advance if you are so generous to point out anything missing or wrong.

I am not an expert in CT and I do not have any experience with Rx or similar frameworks.
Hence, take everything with a grain of salt.

## References

[1] Erik Meijer, [Subject/Observer is Dual to Iterator](http://csl.stanford.edu/~christos/pldi2010.fit/meijer.duality.pdf), FIT: Fun Ideas and Thoughts at PLDI, 2010

[2] Ivar Rummelhoff, [Duality Formalized?](https://social.msdn.microsoft.com/Forums/en-US/d9174d27-ea18-4d2a-a7b4-d15b4afec013/duality-formalized?forum=rx), 2011

[3] Wikipedia [Symmetric Monoidal Category](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Symmetric_monoidal_category)

[4] Wikipedia [Compact Closed Category](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Compact_closed_category)

[5] Sashko Stubailo, [Beating event emitters and Promises with Tracker](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=2WQRm4McIZQ), Devshop SF Feb 2015

[6] Samson Abramsky, [Retracing some paths in Process Algebra](http://arxiv.org/pdf/1401.5113), International Conference on Concurrency Theory, 1996

[7] Yann Orlarey and Dominique Fober and Stephane Letz, [Syntactical and semantical aspects of Faust](https://www.researchgate.net/profile/Yann_Orlarey/publication/226210367_Syntactical_and_semantical_aspects_of_Faust/links/00b7d53c0cb7e5ba5a000000.pdf), Softcomputing, 2004

Ascii diagrams generated with [asciflow](http://asciiflow.com/).
